Burns, would you tell us something about your
early life, including the names of your parents,
the dates of their birth and death, and the places
where they were born and died, the date and place of
your birth, the schools you attended before you
went to Texas A&M, and any other recollections of
your childhood that you have that you might want to
record for us?
Well, my father was Arthur Burns, and he was born
January the 2nd, 1850. I
don't know whether it was 52 or 53.
He was an active cattleman all of his life. Went up
the trail a number of years. Seven years, I think,
drove the trail. He died in 1914. He was, where was
he born? Born in DeWitt County of
one of a family of 10 children who the father was
Columbus Burns, the first white child born in what
now DeWitt County. He was a son of Arthur Burns, my
great grandfather. who came to Texas from Pike
County, Missouri in 1826 and built a log cabin on
the east side of Guadalupe River
and obtained from the Mexican government a league
of land. His son, Squire Burns, a laborer,
He had previously been married, and several
children came with him and his wife, I think his
third wife, when they came to Texas. But Columbus
Burns, my own grandfather, who was born in 1829 and
died in 1899 in my home where I was read, was the
first white child born in that area. He married a
DeMoss, and of that union there were 10 children.
five boys and five girls. My father was the second
of the family. My mother was born Mary Evie
Cardwell, was born in 1855 at
the old Cardwell homestead four miles north of
Cuero. Her father was Crockett Cardwell, who was
born in 1812 during the Battle of New Orleans and
came to Texas in the early 1830s, 1833 I believe,
and came to Gonzales.
My mother's mother, my own grandmother, Ann Eliza
White, married Crockett Cardwell in 1846.
No.
They married 1840. They bought the old Friar
original
homestead property north of Cuero in 1846. That's
where my mother was born. She had a brother
that lived died in early childhood as a boy eight
years old.
Anna Eliza White was a mother and father left
Elizabeth down in North Carolina in 1829 to come to
Texas, and he died en route in Alabama. And my
grandmother, Anna Eliza White, was born in 1824.
She had four brothers.
Let's see, yeah, I believe four, maybe five. They
all came to Texas, and her mother remarried a
fellow named Tomlinson and came on to old
Washington on the Brazos with Austin's colonists
and Berta Gonzalez. And she was in Gonzales when
Sandy Anna ran them out. And one of her
stepbrothers, a Tumbleson, was in the Battle of
the Alamo. That bunch that went from Gonzales to
San Antonio was killed in the Battle of the Alamo.
I've heard her say many times that when Sandy Anna
ran them out of Gonzales,
she rode a big old gray car-chair horse from
Gonzales to the Battle of San Jacinto. It was
within 12 miles of the Battle of San Jacinto when it
was fought. They didn't route there. They could
see Houston's army in front of them, the dust from
across that Eagle Lake prairie, and Santa Ana's
army behind them. So it was pretty squally. She was
a great historian, an Irish gal, and had a lot of
energy and a lot of gold. She lived to be 90 years old
and died my mother's own at Cuero.
They were all of the early, real early settlers in
South Texas. It was a big family connection over
the Burns. Dr. John W. Burns made quite a
reputation. He and his two sons, his doctors
there. Louis Burns was a farmer, stock farmer
north of Quero there for many, many years. And old
Judge Jim Burns was judge, county attorney over
at, lawyer over at Goliad and operated a private
bank there for many, many years.
It was a big family connection, but most of them are
gone. Very few of them
survived. I was born in July 1895, after
the family had moved from the old Cardwell
homestead four miles north of Quirrell. My father
had built my mother a new home there in late 1894,
early 95, and that's where I was born. I was the only
child of a family of five that was born in Cuero. The
rest of them were born at the old Cardwell
homestead north of Cuero, two brothers and two
sisters. John C. Burns, who was later head
of animal husbandry department at A&M College,
an 0-4 man, and A.C. Burns, born in 1886, an 0-7 man,
and two sisters, Mrs. J.W. Hawke of Cuero, and Mrs.
Evie Locker. Mrs. Locker's deceased, and John C.
Burns' deceased. The other sister, Mrs. Hawke,
still lives in Cuero, in the rest home there. A.C.
Burns, a veterinarian, a graduate of A&M in 07,
graduate in veterinary medicine at Ohio State in
1910, and has practiced in the Cleveland area
until retirement a few years ago. I went to public
school at Cuero and probably reached the seventh,
eighth grade, not over the eighth grade, I don't
believe. They picked me up, sent me to Allen
Academy about 1910, 11.
Old man John Rivers Allen was operating at an
academy that had a real good school.
I can't remember whether I went there in ten or
eleven.
A number of the boys that I went to school there,
some few went to A&M later. A bunch of those boys
went to Swanee later. A whole bunch of Waco boys I
know went to Suwannee. I entered A&M College in the
fall of 1912 and finished the spring of 1916 in
animal husbandry. What factors were involved in
your choice of A&M? You had a brother who had been
there. Two of them had been there before. I don't
know if there was any choice about it. It just went.
Just automatic. Just automatic. That's right. No
other school was considered. If I ever had any
other thought, I don't remember it.
Did you go through any particular procedures to
enter school there? I mean, did you apply for
admission? Did you have to take a test or anything
like that?
Yeah, I think I went out there and put in an
application to accept him, but I think when I got
out there, they gave me some examinations, one of
which I didn't pass, and they made me take some work
over, which I flunked then promptly. You had
completed all of the instruction at Allen
Academy, though, by the time you applied. No, just
enough to get into A&M. I didn't graduate at Allen.
Was there a minimum age entrance to A&M at that
point? Did you have to be a certain number of years
old before you could enter A&M? I don't know. I
finished before I was 21 years old. I finished June
and I was 21 July following graduation. So you must
have been, what, about 16 when you entered.
Probably you couldn't have gotten in any younger
than that. No, I was about right. Well, since
you... Allen was then, of course, a military
school as it is now. No, it wasn't. It was not a
military school then? No, no, no. I see. So then you
had not had any... I had had no military training at
all when I went to A&M. You were probably aware of
some of the military aspects. Oh, I'd been out
there. I had a brother. This older brother was head
of animal husbandry department living on the
campus. So I knew everybody out there. You knew all
the faculty members. Oh, I was hazed two years
instead of one. You bet. I knew all of them. You bet.
So you say you were hazed two years instead of one.
Oh, yes. The year before you got there and the first
year you were there. The year before, because I had
this brother there and everybody knew him. John
Burns' brother. Boy, we were making hard on him.
Well, I had the best time of anybody. So when I went
out there, I didn't know any strangers, so I knew
everybody. A number of people have commented to me
that the only people who hazed you were the ones who
really liked you. That's exactly right. That boy
that didn't want to be hazed was not hazed. That's
all baloney about him being cruel and everything.
I've seen some boys ostracized down there because
he just couldn't take it. But I've never had more
fun than I had during my fishing sophomore year
because I took it and then I dished it out when I was a
sophomore. Well, I imagine the boy who didn't want
to be hazed wasn't hazed, and he wasn't liked very
well. He wasn't very popular, that's
right. You were, of course, completely familiar
with it, and I guess there were really no surprises
to you when you got there. Oh, yeah, no, there
wasn't any surprises. You knew what to expect and
everything like that. You, I believe, entered L
Company as a fish. Did you have some choice in that
matter? Well, they just put you in a company where
they wanted you. And as a member of L Company, where
did you live? Austin Hall, the oldest on the
campus, that's right. We carried wood and water, a
wood stove and a bucket and a wash basin there. a
table and two beds and about two chairs, and that
was it. You had, what, two people in the room? Yeah,
me and another boy, and I don't even remember who
the other boy was right at the moment. I believe a
boy named Hans Rice, R-E-U-S-S, from Cuero. And
they moved us. If he and I started rooming there,
they moved us later to the top story of Milner Hall
after the strike. So you had a strike down there,
too. This was in? 1970. Thirteen. Thirteen, yeah.
That's when a bunch of boys left school. That's
right. That's exactly right. Well, after that,
they closed up. They moved a whole bunch of us from
Austin Hall. The L Company was in Austin Hall and
the fourth floor of Milner. So Austin was not big
enough for the whole company? I reckon. But
anyhow, they moved us. and put us upstairs on the
fourth floor, I reckon, of Milner Hall. Well,
Milner probably had central heat, I believe, at
that point, so you didn't have to carry wood
anymore. That's right. We carried many a trunk up
those steps. I imagine so. In Milner, then, I
gather they had a bathroom on every floor. Oh,
yeah. They had showers on every floor, yeah.
Whereas when living in Austin Hall, we had to go to
that old bath, the old, what do we call it, down
there, where they had showers. You'd take your
clothes and soap and towels and go down there and
take a bath. And then go back to the Austin Hall.
That's right. So when you were moved out, then
what'd they do? Just kind of close Austin Hall? I
think they closed Austin Hall and later made a
storage place over there. Probably some other
personnel lived there for a while. It was an old
one, sure enough. I imagine during the war or after
when they had an increase in enrollment, they
probably opened it up again. Probably did. I
wasn't there at that time, of course.
You indicated that there was a strike in 1913. What
do you recall that was the cause of that? Oh, I don't
know. One of the factors was hazing. They had let
some boys go, and they wanted to reinstate them,
and they weren't pleased with Milner, who was
president. There was some other factors that I
don't remember now. We entered into it and of
course there's always a bunch that wanted to blow
up. And they lost a lot of good students. They lost a
lot of good men that left during that strike and
never did come back. And of course some of them did
come back. Now this was, the school had dismissed
some people who were guilty of hazing. Oh yeah,
that's right. And the other boys in... They took
exception to it. They wanted to reinstate it.
That's right. And I think it was over in D Company.
I'm not sure where it was. Seemed to me like it was in
Foster Hall. D Company was in Foster Hall. And I
don't remember the particulars of it. And they had
several mass meetings and... haranguing about
quitting and this, that, and the other. Well, how
did the strike come in? Did the students refuse to
go to school anymore? Well, they just decided not
to go to school. Went home. The others stayed there
and they opened classes and went back to school.
About how long did this whole business go on, do you
remember? Probably a week. I don't remember.
That's been a long time ago. Yeah, I'm sure. I know
it has. It's been a lot of things since that time.
I imagine there was probably a good bit of
difference in life in the dormitory from when you
moved from Austin to Milner, wasn't it? Not a great
deal. You still had a guard every night. You had a
guard over at Austin Hall. You had a guard at the
middle of the same. It wasn't much different. A
little more convenient. We didn't have to carry
wood and water. You didn't have to carry wood and
water, so that was a little bit easier. You still
had a few things to do for the upperclassmen. Oh,
the upperclassmen, it was just like being in the
Army. There was no monkey business about that.
Now, they ran the school. They ran the... company
and they were respected and what they said went.
There wasn't any monkey business about it. Junior
and senior classes, of course, upperclassmen,
they were absolutely in charge. Their word was the
law. That was it, that's right. In addition to
having this this control over the freshmen, did
the upperclassmen have any other privileges that
they could exercise? Oh, yeah, they could go to
town, they could stay out, they'd get off, get
furloughed. The freshmen couldn't get
furloughed. And I think sophomores maybe get off
twice a month, and maybe a junior. I forgot the
details. By furlough, does this mean they could go
home? They could go to Brown, maybe to Calvert,
maybe to... get off Saturday afternoon, see.
About that. They didn't let you off too much. So
they couldn't go to Houston for the weekend or
something like that. Yeah, that's right. You
might get a furlough, go home if you live close. But
you didn't travel around like this now because
there wasn't a way to travel. You either went on the
train or walked. That's right. There were very few
automobiles then. And the cadets weren't allowed
to have one, I understand. No, no, they didn't have
any. Nobody on the campus had an automobile that
had cadets in it. There was a few cars and bronze, a
few on the campus, of course, but that's still in
horse and buggy days.
Okay, so you lived first in Austin Hall, then you
moved to Milner during your first year there. Did
you live in any other dorms? Oh, yeah.
I'm not sure whether this boy that I lived in
Austin,
he may have left on the strike. Anyhow, he didn't
come back for his second year. I roomed with a young
man from Gonzales named Milton Barringer three
years.
We roomed in Ross Hall until we graduated.
Was that when you were in A Company? A Company,
that's right. And he was later president of a
British American oil company in Toronto, Canada.
A very fine young man, had a good mind, and made an
outstanding record. And in Ross Hall, you had the
stoves, did you, and washstands and so forth like
that, being in older Durham? Or do you remember? I
think they'd put in steam heat at Ross Hall, maybe.
By that time? Yeah. And the old bugle deal, the
bugle was right down under the window down there.
So we didn't miss any calls. Couldn't sleep
through it. And this boy in our room with us, I never
was very military, but he was. He was a corporal and
a sergeant, 1st Sergeant of the 8th Company. I
believe, and later Captain A Company. Well, I
believe you made it up to 2nd Lieutenant A Company,
didn't you? Oh, yeah, but they did that. It was
forced on them. I was above privates, and they
couldn't make the above privates to go to drills,
see. So they made us all second lieutenants so we'd
have to attend. By they, who do you mean by they? The
bull, the commandant, the military department,
see. There was a bunch of us buck privates, see. As
seniors? As seniors, yeah. And they just made us
all second lieutenants so we had to attend
formation. That's how simple that was. I see. So
you had a kind of an over... See, a buck private, he
could strangle down to mess all. He didn't have to
attend any. any formations. That would be a senior
buck probably. Yeah, he could strike. I was a
sergeant in G Company but roomed in A Company
because I worked at this fellow and I'd run the year
before in Milner and then we moved over to Ross and I
waited till
Mitchell, G Company's over in Mitchell. Well I
waited till they filled up then I said, well I can't
move over there, there's no place to move, see. So I
went, but I attended formation in G Company during
my junior year and was a line sergeant in G Company.
But I was a buck private the next year, but I was
rooming in A Company. You got a demotion the next
year. That's all right. Yeah, it was good. As I
said, I never was military. I was. So when they made
a whole bunch of your second lieutenants, you must
have had a surplus of second lieutenants. Oh, we
had them. You bet they had several of them in every
company then, you know. It's all right. If I do
this, I'll inject this thought into it, that it's
the finest thing that any young man can have is two
years of military. I think every young man should
have two years of military service. It's... Some
things that you learned
that you'll never learn anywhere else,
particularly how to take and give orders, because
very few people ever live to the point they don't
have to take orders somewhere in their long life.
So it's the best training in the world. I think
every young man ought to have two years of military
training. Whether it's in school or otherwise. It
don't make any difference. I don't care whether
he's in school, whether he takes it in college, or
whether he takes it in the Army. Preferably, I'd
see them taking the Marine Corps because they've
got discipline. They can all tell you about the
freedom of this, that, and the other, but I want to
tell you this world today lacks discipline. We
need it. We need it badly. We need supervision. I
agree with you. If ever I want to have a good
argument with my wife, I tell her that. She
disagrees with me. I see by your yearbook that you
were also in the Bugle Corps. I was. They all got in a
big water fight at mail company one night and they
caught us all and made us go to the Commodore's
office.
write an explanation, and this, that, and the
other, and called us all up, and commented on old
Levi G. Brown. He was tough, too. He was
commenting, but he was all right. And so he says,
Mr. Burns says, you're not getting along very good
in the Air Company. But I wasn't because I didn't
particularly like the captain, and They did have a
first lieutenant was a nice fellow and a second
lieutenant was a nice fellow, but I didn't like the
captain at all.
We didn't see eye to eye, but anyhow we all got in a
big water fight up on the 34th floor of Milner Hall.
Buckets of water just sluiced and they caught us.
So they sent us all to the Commandant's office for
an explanation. Old Levi Brown told me, he says,
Mr. Barnes, you're not getting along very good in
the L Company. He says, we're going to reorganize
the bugle corps. He says, we want to put you in the
bugle corps. I said, why would I have to blow a
bugle? And I never did learn either.
But you stayed in the bugle corps? I stayed in the
bugle corps. For how long? short till the balance
of that year and that was along in the spring so i
wasn't in beautiful johnny garrity and ron hansen
and all several of us in there and put a good bunch of
boys we had a good time but you never never learned
how to blow i never did i could did even noise that's
about all uh even though you didn't didn't really
learn how did they still have you take a turn at the
Added in the morning or in the afternoon? I don't
think they ever trusted me that
far.
What was the food like in the mess hall? Did you have
the new mess hall? No, you didn't have the new one
when you started, did you? No, I reckon we was down
to old mess hall when we started there in the fall of
12. I've eaten down the old one. Yeah, I believe we
had the old mess hall, and later on the next year I
believe we had Spiezel Hall. The old one burned, I
guess, while you were fishing. Yeah, that's
right. The old one burned. That's right. The main
building burned. The main building burned while I
was tailing the academy. The old main building.
Yeah, it burned the year before you started, and
the mess hall burned in 12. Yeah, that's right. And
you had a temporary one for a while. That's right,
yeah. Oh, we got by on it all right. I think Thursday
nights they had T-bone steaks and everybody loved
those, of course. We got by. We had plenty to eat. It
wasn't too bad. Pretty monotonous at times? Oh,
yeah. It gets old. It's like anything else, you
know.
It's been a lot worse. What did you do for
entertainment and recreation if you did anything
other than have a water fight done in it? Oh, we shot
dice and played cards. We had a card game going in L
Company for, oh, I don't know. Poker game? Oh,
pitch principally. Very little poker. Had a few
dice games. I learned early in my career that I was
not a dice shooter. I didn't shoot dice much, but we
did have a pitch game going most of the time. I
devoted a lot of time to that.
There wasn't much recreation, really. You kind of
had to make your own.
And then you'd get off maybe once a month, maybe
you'd go to Braun and see a picture show, and that
was about it. And that old trolley, you know, that
was an old gasoline trolley run from Braun to
college. Yeah. I believe later they made it
electric. Oh yeah, that's right, but that was an
old gasoline trolley early.
Yeah. hadn't been going for more than a year or two
when you started there. And of course there was
football in the fall and basketball. They just
started doing basketball to any degree and
baseball in the spring. You could go out there and
watch them practice and that stuff. Of course you
drilled it three days a week. You drilled Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday, see. For how long? Two
hours. Two hours? You bet, yeah. I think two hours.
Spent a good bit of time in class and in lab, too.
That's right. You had lab classes in the
afternoon. You got up 6 o'clock in the morning in
formation. You had room inspection.
You had things pretty clean, pretty well done up.
Then Sunday morning, every Sunday morning, you
had Sunday morning inspection. Did you have your
inspection before or after you went to chapel?
Before you went to chapel, yeah. You'd go to chapel
till 11 o'clock, I believe. Some old boys went to
Sunday school classes. You had Sunday school
before chapel then? Yeah, we had Sunday morning
inspection usually before chapel. So what, you'd
line up on Military Walk and have inspection? No,
room inspection. Room inspection, so you had to be
in the room. Yeah, you bet. It had to be clean, too.
Your guns had to be clean, and everything had to be
in order. And that was part of the regular army that
came by? Oh, yeah, absolutely. But then you also
had a daily inspection, didn't you? Well, of
course, that daily inspection. They'd look in on
those rooms every morning to see if your beds were
made up.